# Violence and local business in the city of Tijuana


Tijuana is one of Mexico's largest and fastest-growing cities, and it is the home of 3.4 million people in 2014,  making it the largest Mexican city on the U.S.-Mexico border.  The city is home to roughly 49 % of Baja California's population while comprising only around 2 % of its territory.  Tijuana reportedly grows at an annual rate of 35,000 people per year, or nearly 96 new inhabitants per day, drawing large numbers of immigrants from elsewhere in Mexico to join the city's robust economy. Today, nearly 190,000 people cross the border between Tijuana and neighboring San Diego daily for work and other recreational pursuits. The city's proximity to Southern California and its large, skilled, diverse, and relatively inexpensive workforce make it an attractive city for foreign companies looking to establish extensive industrial parks composed of assembly plants that are called "maquiladoras", even more so than other cities in the US-Mexican border zone, taking advantage of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) to export products.  In the past decade alone,  Tijuana became the medical device manufacture capital of the  North  American continent,  surpassing previous leader Minneapolis - Saint Paul. One study estimates that this region is responsible for roughly 40% of all audio-visual manufacturing in North America.  But the abundance of jobs does not go hand in hand with a better quality of life.  According to a recent study in 2018 by the National Council for the Evaluation of Social Development Policy (CONEVAL, for his name in Spanish),  almost 70 % of the population lives in poverty conditions, there are lots of jobs but meager wages and poor conditions for Social mobility. 

Given the city's geographic point, a rise in violence related to drug trafficking and organized crime groups has been seen in the past decades.  The city also has high levels of drug use shaped by its proximity to the United States, but still, there is no analysis or even data of the real problem.  Drug violence continues to dominate in Tijuana, wherein 2017 had more homicides than any other city in Mexico, in a record year for national homicide figures, in 2017 one out of twenty murders in Mexico took place in Tijuana. There is not a concise analysis of the violence in the city from the government. This work is the start of what I hope becomes that concise analysis, starting with a focus on the effect of the violence on the local business.
